Next.js/Gatsby Migration guides to Astro (#2211)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/guides/migrate-to-astro/from-gatsby.mdx

- Astro projects can also be SSG or [SSR](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/). (Support for per-page rendering strategy is planned.)

## Key Differences between Gatsby and Astro

When you rebuild your Gatsby site in Astro, you will notice some important differences:

- [MPA vs SPA](/en/concepts/mpa-vs-spa/): Gatsby is a React single-page app, and uses `index.js` as your project's root. Astro is a multi-page site, and `index.astro` is your home page.

- [Astro components](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/) are not written as exported functions that return page templating. Instead, you'll split your code into a "code fence" and a body exclusively for the HTML you generate.

- [Local file data](/en/guides/imports/): Gatsby uses GraphQL to retrieve data from your project files. Astro uses ESM imports and a top-level await [`Astro.glob()`](/en/guides/imports/#astroglob) call to import data from your project files. GraphQL may be optionally be added to your Astro project, but is not included by default.

## Convert your Project

> ### Create a new Astro project

Reviewer: We *could* use the same "Switch from X to Astro" heading that the stubs use here... (even though it's technically the step where you create a new project).

"Switch from X to Astro"
use `npm create astro@latest`...

> ### Create a new Astro project

Reviewer 2: Nah, that’s not great. I think it’s fine to leave it.

- **@astrojs/react**: to reuse some existing React UI components in your new Astro site, or keep writing with React components.

- **@astrojs/image**: to replace Gatsby's Image plugin with Astro's own image-optimizing components. (Experimental: works in `.astro` and `.mdx` files only.)

- **@astrojs/mdx**: to bring existing MDX files from your Gatsby project, or to use MDX in your new Astro site.

### Repurpose config files

Gatsby has several top-level configuration files that also include site and page metadata and are used for routing. You will not use any of these `gatsby-*.js` files in your Astro project, but there may be some content that you can reuse:

- `gatsby-config.js`: Move your `siteMetadata: {}` into `src/data/siteMetadata.js` (or `siteMetadata.json`) to import data about your site (title, description, social accounts etc.) into page layouts.

- `gatsby-browser.js`: Consider adding anything used here directly into your main layout's `<head>` tag.

- `gatsby-node.js`: You will not need to create your own nodes in Astro, but viewing the schema in this file may help you with defining types in your Astro project.

> - `gatsby-ssr.js`: If you choose to use SSR in Astro, you will add and configure the adapter of your choice directly in `astro.config.mjs`.

Reviewer 2: Reminder to take a pass for link opportunities? Here I noticed SSR could definitely map to the SSR docs? Probably more opportunities like that here and elsewhere.

2. **Rename** Gatsby's `static/` folder to `public/`, and use it as Astro's `public/` folder. 

    Astro uses a folder called `public/` for static assets. You can alternatively copy the contents of `static/` into your existing Astro `public/` folder.

3. **Copy or Move** Gatsby's other files and folders (e.g. `components`, `pages` etc.) as needed into your Astro `src/` folder as you rebuild your site, following [Astro's project structure](/en/core-concepts/project-structure/).

  Astro's `src/pages/` folder is a special folder used for file-based routing to create your site's pages and posts from `.astro`, `.md` and `.mdx` files. You will not have to configure any routing behavior for your Astro, Markdown and MDX files.

  All other folders are optional, and you can organize the contents of your `src/` folder any way you like. Other common folders in Astro projects include `src/layouts/`, `src/components`, `src/styles`, `src/scripts`.

### Convert JSX files to `.astro` files

Here are some tips for converting a Gatsby `.js` component into a `.astro` component:

1. Use only the `return()` of the existing Gatsby component function as your HTML template.

> 1. Change any [Gatsby or JSX syntax to Astro](#reference-convert-to-astro-syntax) (e.g. `<Link to="">`, `{children}`, `className`, inline style objects) or to HTML web standards.

Reviewer 2: The mid-sentence parentheses threw me while reading. What do you think of this? I’ve also cut the mention of inline style objects as these _do_ work in Astro even if they’re less commonly used by Astro users.

```suggestion
1. Change any [Gatsby or JSX syntax to Astro syntax](#reference-convert-to-astro-syntax) or to HTML web standards. This includes `<Link to="">`, `{children}`, and `className`, for example.
```

1. Move any necessary JavaScript, including import statements, into a "code fence" (`---`). Note: JavaScript to [conditionally render content](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#dynamic-html) is often written inside the HTML template directly in Astro.

4. Write an `Astro.props` statement to access any additional props that were previously passed to your Gatsby function.

4. Decide whether any imported components also need to be converted to Astro. With the official integration installed, you can [use existing React components in your Astro file](/en/guides/integrations-guide/react/). But, you may want to convert them to Astro, especially if they do not need to be interactive!

4. Remove any GraphQL queries. Instead, use import and `Astro.glob()` statements to query your local files. Update any [dynamic HTML content variables](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#dynamic-html) to use Astro-specific properties instead.

See [an example from Gatsby's Blog starter template converted step-by-step](#guided-example-gatsby-layout-to-astro)

#### Compare: `.jsx` vs `.astro`

Compare the following Gatsby component and a corresponding Astro component:

> <AstroJSXTabs>

Reviewer 2: Not convinced about splitting these into tabs making it _impossible_ to see both at the same time. (OK, I guess you could open the page twice in two windows? 😅)

Two notes:

1. How about we break this up a little and show JSX followed by Astro for each related “chunk”? Although there is some advantage obviously to seeing the full component in one block.

2. I think we can def simplify this comparison. Quick wins, but we can probably do more:
    - just one component import instead of header _and_ footer
    - _maybe_ save GraphQL for later?
    - only use one `style={{}}` object, and make it only include one/two styles

Perhaps 2 is enough here and we condense it down, show them consecutively and call it a day.

Reviewer: I continue to struggle here. I *like* an entire file comparison. I *like* that it shows GraphQL (because that's a big deal!) compared to `Astro.glob()`. I even sort of like that you flip the tab and realize that you CAN see all the `.astro` file on one desktop screen at once, but you can't with the original?  :sweat: 

I wish we had a side-by-side strategy, but we don't. At this point, you can't see both on the page at the same time anyway (you'd have to scroll, they're too long, and will be even with some cutting). SO, at least flipping tabs is a nicer way to compare than scrolling, I actually think? If the point is just looking as a comparison, there's something to be said for the page not moving on you?

I'll think about where it could be cut to be shorter, but given that it won't get THAT much shorter, I'm not even sure that's our biggest problem.

We'll figure this one out eventually!

Reviewer 3: I agree with @delucis's #2. The tabs interface is fine, but it works better when you don't have to scroll. We can simplify the example to show "one-of-a-kind" - we don't need two style objects each with four properties, lengthening the sample without adding a new concept.

Reviewer: Will trim this one!

    ---
    {message === "denied"
      ? <p>You are not authorized to see this page.</p>

      : <Header siteTitle={site.title} />
        <div class="banner">{message}</div>  
        <div style="margin: 0 auto; max-width: 960; padding: 1.25rem;">
          <main>
            <slot />
          </main>
        </div>
        <Footer siteTitle={site.title} />
    }

    <style>
      .banner { 
        margin: 0 auto;
        background-color: #f4f4f4; 
        padding: 1em 1.5em;
      }  
    </style>
    ```
  </Fragment>
</AstroJSXTabs>

### Migrating Layout Files

In Astro, your layout must include a full page shell (`<html>`, `<head>` and `<body>` tags) and a `<slot/>` instead of React's `{children}` prop. Your Gatsby `layout.js` and templates will not include these. 

You can use the following code to provide these extra elements around an existing Gatsby layout file, or write your own:

```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro" "slot"
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
    <title>Astro</title>
  </head>
  <body>

>     <slot />

Reviewer 2: Worth adding some comment to the effect that the “existing Gatsby layout” would go here?

```suggestion
    <!-- Wrap the slot element with your existing layout templating -->
    <slot />
```

  </body>
</html>
```

> You may also wish to reuse code from Gatsby's `src/components/seo.js` to include additional site meta data. Notice that Astro uses neither `<Helmet>` nor `<Header>` but instead accesses `<head>` directly. You may create and import components, even within `<head>`, to separate and organize your page content.

Reviewer 2: Nits! 🐜 

```suggestion
You may also wish to reuse code from Gatsby's `src/components/seo.js` to include additional site meta data. Notice that Astro uses neither `<Helmet>` nor `<Header>` but instead creates `<head>` directly. You may import and use components, even within `<head>`, to separate and organize your page content.
```

<a href="/blog">Blog</a>
```

Astro does not use any special component for links, although you are welcome to build custom link components. You can then import and use this `<Link>` just as you would any other component.

```astro title="src/components/Link.astro"
---
const { to } = Astro.props
---
<a href={to}><slot /></a>
```

### Gatsby Imports to Astro

If necessary, update any file imports to reference relative file paths exactly. This can be done using [import aliases](/en/guides/typescript/#import-aliases), or by writing out a relative path in full. 

Note that `.astro` and several other file types must be imported with their full file extension.

```astro title="src/pages/authors/Fred.astro" ".astro"
---
import Card from `../../components/Card.astro`;
---
<Card />
```

### Gatsby Children Props to Astro

Convert any instances of `{children}` to an Astro `<slot />`. Astro does not need to receive `{children}` as a function prop and will automatically render child content in a `<slot />`.

```astro title="src/components/MyComponent" del={1-7} ins={9}
export default function MyComponent(props) { 
    return (
      <div>
        {props.children}
      </div>
    );  
}

> <slot />

Reviewer 2: Micro nit that the Astro/Gatsby comparison wasn’t quite equivalent:

```suggestion
<div>
  <slot />
</div>
```

```

React components that pass multiple sets of children can be migrated to an Astro component using [named slots](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#named-slots):

```astro title="src/components/PageHeader.astro"
<header>
  <nav>
    <ul>
      <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
      <slot name="navItems"/>
    </ul>
  </nav>
	<slot/>
</header>

> ```

Reviewer 2: Probably safe to cut this and rework the surrounding text to just depend on links?

See more about [specific `<slot />` usage in Astro](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#slots).

### Gatsby Styling to Astro

> Convert any inline style objects (`style = {{fontWeight: "bold", }}`) to inline HTML style attributes (`style="font-weight:bold;"`). Or, use an Astro `<style>` tag for scoped CSS styles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Convert any inline style objects (`style={{ fontWeight: "bold" }}`) to inline HTML style attributes (`style="font-weight:bold;"`). Or, use an Astro `<style>` tag for scoped CSS styles.
```

### Gatsby Links to Astro

Convert any Gatsby `<Link to="">`, `<NavLink>` etc. components to HTML `<a href="">` tags. 

```astro del={1} ins={2}
<Link to="/blog">Blog</Link>
<a href="/blog">Blog</a>
```

Astro does not use any special component for links, although you are welcome to build custom link components. You can then import and use this `<Link>` just as you would any other component.

```astro title="src/components/Link.astro"
---
const { to } = Astro.props
---
<a href={to}><slot /></a>
```

### Gatsby Imports to Astro

If necessary, update any file imports to reference relative file paths exactly. This can be done using [import aliases](/en/guides/typescript/#import-aliases), or by writing out a relative path in full. 

Note that `.astro` and several other file types must be imported with their full file extension.

```astro title="src/pages/authors/Fred.astro" ".astro"
---
import Card from `../../components/Card.astro`;
---
<Card />
```

### Gatsby Children Props to Astro

Convert any instances of `{children}` to an Astro `<slot />`. Astro does not need to receive `{children}` as a function prop and will automatically render child content in a `<slot />`.

> ```astro title="src/components/MyComponent" del={1-7} ins={9}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```astro title="src/components/MyComponent" del={1-7} ins={9-11}
```

Astro does not use any special component for links, although you are welcome to build custom link components. You can then import and use this `<Link>` just as you would any other component.

```astro title="src/components/Link.astro"
---
const { to } = Astro.props
---
<a href={to}><slot /></a>
```

### Gatsby Imports to Astro

If necessary, update any file imports to reference relative file paths exactly. This can be done using [import aliases](/en/guides/typescript/#import-aliases), or by writing out a relative path in full. 

Note that `.astro` and several other file types must be imported with their full file extension.

```astro title="src/pages/authors/Fred.astro" ".astro"
---
import Card from `../../components/Card.astro`;
---
<Card />
```

### Gatsby Children Props to Astro

Convert any instances of `{children}` to an Astro `<slot />`. Astro does not need to receive `{children}` as a function prop and will automatically render child content in a `<slot />`.

```astro title="src/components/MyComponent" del={1-7} ins={9-11}
export default function MyComponent(props) { 
    return (
      <div>
        {props.children}
      </div>
    );  
}

<div>
  <slot />
</div>
```

> React components that pass multiple sets of children can be migrated to an Astro component using [named slots](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#named-slots):
> 
> ```astro title="src/components/PageHeader.astro"
> <header>
>   <nav>
>     <ul>
>       <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
>       <slot name="navItems"/>
>     </ul>
>   </nav>
> 	<slot/>
> </header>
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React components that pass multiple sets of children can be migrated to an Astro component using [named slots](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#named-slots). 
```

- Astro also has [official integrations for using React components](/en/guides/integrations-guide/react/). Note that in Astro, React files **must** have a `.jsx` or `.tsx` extension.

- Astro has support for [installing NPM packages](/en/guides/imports/#npm-packages), including React libraries. You may be able to keep some or all of your existing React components and dependencies.

- Astro projects can also be SSG or [SSR with page level prerendering](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#prerendering).

## Key Differences between Gatsby and Astro

When you rebuild your Gatsby site in Astro, you will notice some important differences:

- [MPA vs SPA](/en/concepts/mpa-vs-spa/): Gatsby is a React single-page app, and uses `index.js` as your project's root. Astro is a multi-page site, and `index.astro` is your home page.

- [Astro components](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/) are not written as exported functions that return page templating. Instead, you'll split your code into a "code fence" and a body exclusively for the HTML you generate.

> - [Local file data](/en/guides/imports/): Gatsby uses GraphQL to retrieve data from your project files. Astro uses ESM imports and a top-level await [`Astro.glob()`](/en/guides/imports/#astroglob) call to import data from your project files. GraphQL may optionally be added to your Astro project, but is not included by default.

Reviewer 4: nitpick: unnecessary comma
```suggestion
- [Local file data](/en/guides/imports/): Gatsby uses GraphQL to retrieve data from your project files. Astro uses ESM imports and a top-level await [`Astro.glob()`](/en/guides/imports/#astroglob) call to import data from your project files. GraphQL may optionally be added to your Astro project but is not included by default.
```

### Create a new Astro project

Use the `create astro` command for your package manager to launch Astro's CLI wizard or choose a community theme from the [Astro Theme Showcase](https://astro.build/themes). 

You can also pass a `--template` argument to the `create astro` command to start from an existing Astro repository on GitHub:

  <PackageManagerTabs>
    <Fragment slot="npm">
    ```shell
    # launch the Astro CLI Wizard 
    npm create astro@latest

    # start from any existing repo
    npm create astro -- --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
    ```
    </Fragment>
    <Fragment slot="pnpm">
    ```shell
    # launch the Astro CLI Wizard 
    pnpm create astro@latest

    # start from any existing repo
    pnpm create astro --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
    ```
    </Fragment>
    <Fragment slot="yarn">
    ```shell
    # launch the Astro CLI Wizard 
    yarn create astro@latest

    # start from any existing repo
    yarn create astro --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
    ```
    </Fragment>
  </PackageManagerTabs>

Then, copy your existing Gatsby project files over to your new Astro project into a separate folder outside of `src`.

:::tip

> Prefer to explore in your browser instead? Visit https://astro.new for a variety of starter templates that can be opened and edited in StackBlitz, CodeSandbox or Gitpod.

Reviewer 4: Serial comma
```suggestion
Prefer to explore in your browser instead? Visit https://astro.new for a variety of starter templates that can be opened and edited in StackBlitz, CodeSandbox, or Gitpod.
```

:::

### Install integrations (optional)

You may find it useful to install some of [Astro's optional integrations](/en/guides/integrations-guide/) to use while converting your Gatsby project to Astro:

- **@astrojs/react**: to reuse some existing React UI components in your new Astro site, or keep writing with React components.

- **@astrojs/image**: to replace Gatsby's Image plugin with Astro's own image-optimizing components. (Experimental: works in `.astro` and `.mdx` files only.)

- **@astrojs/mdx**: to bring existing MDX files from your Gatsby project, or to use MDX in your new Astro site.

### Repurpose config files

Gatsby has several top-level configuration files that also include site and page metadata and are used for routing. You will not use any of these `gatsby-*.js` files in your Astro project, but there may be some content that you can reuse:

> - `gatsby-config.js`: Move your `siteMetadata: {}` into `src/data/siteMetadata.js` (or `siteMetadata.json`) to import data about your site (title, description, social accounts etc.) into page layouts.

Reviewer 4: Serial comma
```suggestion
- `gatsby-config.js`: Move your `siteMetadata: {}` into `src/data/siteMetadata.js` (or `siteMetadata.json`) to import data about your site (title, description, social accounts, etc.) into page layouts.
```

- `gatsby-browser.js`: Consider adding anything used here directly into your main layout's `<head>` tag.

- `gatsby-node.js`: You will not need to create your own nodes in Astro, but viewing the schema in this file may help you with defining types in your Astro project.

- `gatsby-ssr.js`: If you choose to use SSR in Astro, you will add and configure the adapter of your choice directly in `astro.config.mjs`.

### Put your code in `src`

1. **Delete** Gatsby's `public/` folder. 
    
    Gatsby uses the `public/` directory for its build output, so you can safely discard this folder. You will no longer need a built version of your Gatsby site. (Astro uses `dist/` by default for the build output.)

2. **Rename** Gatsby's `static/` folder to `public/`, and use it as Astro's `public/` folder. 

    Astro uses a folder called `public/` for static assets. You can alternatively copy the contents of `static/` into your existing Astro `public/` folder.

> 3. **Copy or Move** Gatsby's other files and folders (e.g. `components`, `pages` etc.) as needed into your Astro `src/` folder as you rebuild your site, following [Astro's project structure](/en/core-concepts/project-structure/).

Reviewer 4: Serial comma
```suggestion
3. **Copy or Move** Gatsby's other files and folders (e.g. `components`, `pages`, etc.) as needed into your Astro `src/` folder as you rebuild your site, following [Astro's project structure](/en/core-concepts/project-structure/).
```

>   Astro's `src/pages/` folder is a special folder used for file-based routing to create your site's pages and posts from `.astro`, `.md` and `.mdx` files. You will not have to configure any routing behavior for your Astro, Markdown and MDX files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Astro's `src/pages/` folder is a special folder used for file-based routing to create your site's pages and posts from `.astro`, `.md` and `.mdx` files. You will not have to configure any routing behavior for your Astro, Markdown, and MDX files.
```

Here are some tips for converting a Gatsby `.js` component into a `.astro` component:

1. Use only the `return()` of the existing Gatsby component function as your HTML template.

1. Change any [Gatsby or JSX syntax to Astro syntax](#reference-convert-to-astro-syntax) or to HTML web standards. This includes `<Link to="">`, `{children}`, and `className`, for example.

1. Move any necessary JavaScript, including import statements, into a ["code fence" (`---`)](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#the-component-script). Note: JavaScript to [conditionally render content](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#dynamic-html) is often written inside the HTML template directly in Astro.

4. Use [`Astro.props`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astroprops) to access any additional props that were previously passed to your Gatsby function.

4. Decide whether any imported components also need to be converted to Astro. With the official React integration installed, you can [use existing React components in your Astro files](/en/core-concepts/framework-components/). But, you may want to convert them to `.astro` components, especially if they do not need to be interactive!

> 4. Remove any GraphQL queries. Instead, use import and [`Astro.glob()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astroglob) statements to query your local files. Update any [dynamic HTML content variables](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#dynamic-html) to use Astro-specific properties instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Remove any GraphQL queries. Instead, use import and [`Astro.glob()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astroglob) statements to query your local files.
```

              padding: `1.25rem`,
            }}
          >
            <main>{children}</main>
            </div>
          
          <Footer siteTitle={data.site.siteMetadata} />

        </>
      )
    }

    Component.propTypes = {
      children: PropTypes.node.isRequired,
    }

    export default Component
    ``` 
  </Fragment>

  <Fragment slot="astro">
    ```astro title="component.astro"
    ---
    import Header from "./Header.astro"
    import Footer from "./Footer.astro"
    import "../styles/stylesheet.css"
    import { site } from "../data/siteMetaData.js"
    const { message } = Astro.props
    ---
    {message === "denied"
      ? <p>You are not authorized to see this page.</p>

      : <Header siteTitle={site.title} />
        <div class="banner">{message}</div>  
        <div style="margin: 0 auto; max-width: 960; padding: 1.25rem;">
          <main>
            <slot />
          </main>
        </div>
        <Footer siteTitle={site.title} />
    }

    <style>
      .banner { 
        margin: 0 auto;
        background-color: #f4f4f4; 
        padding: 1em 1.5em;
      }  
    </style>
    ```
  </Fragment>
</AstroJSXTabs>

### Migrating Layout Files

> You may find it helpful to start by converting your Next.js layouts and templates into [Astro layout components](/en/core-concepts/layouts/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You may find it helpful to start by converting your Gatsby layouts and templates into [Astro layout components](/en/core-concepts/layouts/).
```

Each Astro page explicitly requires `<html>`, `<head>`, and `<body>` tags to be present, so it is common to reuse a layout file across pages. Astro uses a [`<slot />`](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#slots) instead of React's `{children}` prop for page content, with no import statement required. Your Gatsby `layout.js` and templates will not include these.

Note the standard HTML templating, and direct access to `<head>`:  

```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro" "slot"
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
    <title>Astro</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <!-- Wrap the slot element with your existing layout templating -->
    <slot />
  </body>
</html>
```

> You may also wish to reuse code from Gatsby's `src/components/seo.js` to include additional site meta data. Notice that Astro uses neither `<Helmet>` nor `<Header>` but instead creates `<head>` directly. You may import and use components, even within `<head>`, to separate and organize your page content.

Reviewer 4: meta data -> metadata
```suggestion
You may also wish to reuse code from Gatsby's `src/components/seo.js` to include additional site metadata. Notice that Astro uses neither `<Helmet>` nor `<Header>` but instead creates `<head>` directly. You may import and use components, even within `<head>`, to separate and organize your page content.
```

### Migrating Pages and Posts

> In Gatsby, your [pages and posts](/en/core-concepts/pages/) may exist in `src/pages/` or outside of `src` in another folder, like `content`. In Astro, **all your page content must live within `src/`**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Gatsby, your [pages and posts](/en/core-concepts/astro-pages/) may exist in `src/pages/` or outside of `src` in another folder, like `content`. In Astro, **all your page content must live within `src/`**.
```

#### React Pages

Your existing Gatsby JSX (`.js`) pages will need to be [converted from JSX files to `.astro` pages](#convert-jsx-files-to-astro-files). You cannot use an existing JSX page file in Astro.

These `.astro` pages must be located within `src/pages/` and will have page routes generated automatically based on their file path.

#### Markdown and MDX pages

> Astro has built-in support for Markdown and an optional integration for MDX files. Your existing [Markdown and MDX files](/en/guides/markdown-content/) can be reused, but may require some adjustments to their frontmatter, such as adding [Astro's special `layout` frontmatter property](/en/core-concepts/layouts/#markdownmdx-layouts). They can also be placed within `src/pages/` to take advantage of automatic file-based routing.
> 
> When part of a [content collection](/en/guides/content-collections/), Markdown and MDX files will live in folders within `src/content/` and you will [generate those pages dynamically](/en/guides/content-collections/#generating-pages-from-content-collections).

Reviewer 4: nitpick: unnecessary comma
```suggestion
Astro has built-in support for Markdown and an optional integration for MDX files. Your existing [Markdown and MDX files](/en/guides/markdown-content/) can be reused but may require some adjustments to their frontmatter, such as adding [Astro's special `layout` frontmatter property](/en/core-concepts/layouts/#markdownmdx-layouts). They can also be placed within `src/pages/` to take advantage of automatic file-based routing.

When part of a [content collection](/en/guides/content-collections/), Markdown and MDX files will live in folders within `src/content/` and you will [generate those pages dynamically](/en/guides/content-collections/#generating-pages-from-content-collections).
```

### Migrating Tests

> As Astro outputs raw HTML, it is possible to write end-to-end tests using the output of the build step. Any end-to-end tests written previously might work out-of-the-box, if you have been able to match the markup of the older Gatsby site. Testing libraries such as Jest and React Testing Library can be imported and used in Astro to test your React components.

Reviewer 4: nitpick: unnecessary comma
```suggestion
As Astro outputs raw HTML, it is possible to write end-to-end tests using the output of the build step. Any end-to-end tests written previously might work out-of-the-box if you have been able to match the markup of the older Gatsby site. Testing libraries such as Jest and React Testing Library can be imported and used in Astro to test your React components.
```

---
import Card from `../../components/Card.astro`;
---
<Card />
```

### Gatsby Children Props to Astro

Convert any instances of `{children}` to an Astro `<slot />`. Astro does not need to receive `{children}` as a function prop and will automatically render child content in a `<slot />`.

```astro title="src/components/MyComponent" del={3-9} ins={11-13}
---
---
export default function MyComponent(props) { 
    return (
      <div>
        {props.children}
      </div>
    );  
}

<div>
  <slot />
</div>
```

React components that pass multiple sets of children can be migrated to an Astro component using [named slots](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#named-slots). 

See more about [specific `<slot />` usage in Astro](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#slots).

### Gatsby Styling to Astro

Convert any inline style objects (`style={{ fontWeight: "bold" }}`) to inline HTML style attributes (`style="font-weight:bold;"`). Or, use an Astro `<style>` tag for scoped CSS styles.

```astro title="src/components/Card.astro" del={1} ins={2}
<div style={{backgroundColor: `#f4f4f4`, padding: `1em`}}>{message}</div>
<div style="background-color: #f4f4f4; padding: 1em;">{message}</div>
```

> You may also need to replace any CSS-in-JS libraries (e.g. styled components) with other available CSS options in Astro.

Reviewer 4: Considering we are talking about the library, should we refer to it with a hyphen the same way as its official docs?
```suggestion
You may also need to replace any CSS-in-JS libraries (e.g. styled-components) with other available CSS options in Astro.
```

> Tailwind is supported after installing the [Tailwind integration](/en/guides/integrations-guide/tailwind/). No changes to your code are required!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tailwind is supported after installing the [Tailwind integration](/en/guides/integrations-guide/tailwind/). No changes to your existing Tailwind code are required!
```

  ```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro" "<slot />" "class" "Astro" "astro.build"
  ---
  ---
  <div class="global-wrapper" data-is-root-path={isRootPath}>
    <header class="global-header">{header}</header>
    <main><slot /></main>
    <footer>
      © {new Date().getFullYear()}, Built with
      {` `}
      <a href="https://www.astro.build">Astro</a>
    </footer>
  </div>
  ```

3. Add a page shell so that your layout provides each page with the necessary parts of an HTML document:

  ```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro" ins={3-10,22-23}
  ---
  ---
  <html>
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8" />
      <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
      <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
      <title>Astro</title>
    </head>
    <body>
      <div class="global-wrapper" data-is-root-path={isRootPath}>
        <header class="global-header">{header}</header>
        <main>
          <slot />
        </main>
        <footer>
          &#169; {new Date().getFullYear()}, Built with
          {` `}
          <a href="https://www.astro.build">Astro</a>
        </footer>
      </div>
    </body>
  </html>
  ```

> 3. Add any needed JavaScript, props, imports.

Reviewer 4: This is mentioned several times but in different order and styling (comma, no comma, with/without "and"), so I added a few suggestions to make them all the same.

```suggestion
3. Add any needed imports, props, and JavaScript
```

title: Migrating from Gatsby
description: Tips for migrating an existing Gatsby project to Astro
layout: ~/layouts/MigrationLayout.astro
stub: false
framework: Gatsby
---
import AstroJSXTabs from '~/components/tabs/AstroJSXTabs.astro'
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

After following the guidance on this page, you probably won't have your new Astro site exactly the way you want it yet.

> But, this guide gives you some key concepts and migration strategies to help you get started. Use the rest of our docs and our [Discord community](https://astro.build/chat) to keep going!

Reviewer: Agreed. I'd like to find a way to work in this "truth in advertising", but this isn't the right place!

Thanks for calling this out!

- [Local file data](/en/guides/imports/): Gatsby uses GraphQL to retrieve data from your project files. Astro uses ESM imports and a top-level await [`Astro.glob()`](/en/guides/imports/#astroglob) call to import data from your project files. GraphQL may be optionally be added to your Astro project, but is not included by default.

## Convert your Project

### Get Started with Astro

- Option 1: **Create a new Astro project** 

  Use `npm create astro@latest` to launch Astro's CLI wizard or choose a community theme from the [Astro Theme Showcase](https://astro.build/themes). 
  
  
  You can also pass a `--template` argument to the `create-astro` command to start from an existing Astro repository on GitHub:

    <PackageManagerTabs>
      <Fragment slot="npm">
      ```shell
      npm create astro -- --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
      ```
      </Fragment>
      <Fragment slot="pnpm">
      ```shell
      pnpm create astro --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
      ```
      </Fragment>
      <Fragment slot="yarn">
      ```shell
      yarn create astro --template <github-username>/<github-repo>
      ```
      </Fragment>
    </PackageManagerTabs>
  

>   Then, copy your existing Gatsby project files over to your new Astro project into a separate folder outside of `src`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Then, copy your existing Gatsby project files over to your new Astro project into a separate, temporary folder outside of `./src` like `./_migration`. We will pick files one by one from there to re-integrate them in the new Astro project.
```

That is what I assume is the intend of this part, right?

> - Option 2: **Update your existing Gatsby project dependencies**

Reviewer 5: Does this really work? There are so many details that will not work that it is really hard to get stuff going again once you rip out the one and add the other. Also, "any Gatsby-related dependencies" is very vague especially with "Astro has support for installing NPM packages, including several for React. You may be able to keep some or all of your existing React components and dependencies." given.

I feel like you would want to promote only option 1 and make that a great experience instead of this part…

Gatsby is so entangled with the way GraphQL works that just removing it and adding Astro should nearly always result in a project that cannot start.

On the other hand, with option 1 you have something that can be viewed in the browser and than migrated file by file.

>   Remove any Gatsby-related dependencies in `package.json` and follow all the steps to [install Astro manually](/en/install/manual/) in your existing repository. (You may wish to do this on a different branch.) 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Remove any Gatsby-related dependencies in `package.json` and follow all the steps to [install Astro manually](/en/install/manual/) in your existing repository.
```

IMO not needed

  
  Make sure you have [these project files](/en/install/manual/#7-next-steps) and a working home page before continuing. 

:::tip
Prefer to explore in your browser instead? Visit https://astro.new for a variety of starter templates that can be opened and edited in StackBlitz, CodeSandbox or Gitpod.
:::

### Install integrations (optional)

You may find it useful to install some of [Astro's optional integrations](/en/guides/integrations-guide/) to use while converting your Gatsby project to Astro:

> - **@astrojs/react**: to reuse some existing React UI components in your new Astro site, or keep writing with React components.

Reviewer 5: Well, for a migration guide from Gatsby to Astro, this is not "may find it useful" but "required to get stuff going", right?

Unless one wants to rework every single jsx-component to .astro _and_ have not single island, right?

> - **@astrojs/image**: to replace Gatsby's Image plugin with Astro's own image-optimizing components.

Reviewer 5: This is where I had the most issues with. See my other comments in https://github.com/withastro/docs/issues/2236#issuecomment-1369485929. Does the guide go into details later? If so, a reference here would be nice ("More on this in chapter …").

- **@astrojs/mdx**: to bring existing MDX files from your Gatsby project, or to use MDX in your new Astro site.

### Put your code in `src`

> 1. **Delete** Gatsby's `public/` folder. 

Reviewer 5: Only if Option 2 was picket…

Maybe move this to the "what is different" section as a "FYI, this is the difference in the folder tree"

    
    Gatsby uses the `public/` directory for its build output, so you can safely discard this folder. You will no longer need a built version of your Gatsby site. (Astro uses `dist/` by default for the build output.)

2. **Rename** Gatsby's `static/` folder to `public/`, and use it as Astro's `public/` folder. 

    Astro uses a folder called `public/` for static assets. You can alternatively copy the contents of `static/` into an existing Astro `public/` folder.

> 3. **Copy or Move** Gatsby's other files and folders (e.g. `components`, `pages` etc.) into Astro's `src/` folder.

Reviewer 5: For my project, this did not work. Once I move a lot of files in VS Code, all manner of imports and such get updated and the system tries to build all those files. I did get many errors all over the place – too many to fix one by one.

Instead I moved on page at a time and got that page working. This way the errors are managable.

There is also quite a bit of stuff that needs updating, like Gatsby Types (if using TS), imports that are Gatsby specific, like changing all `<Link to…`<a href…` and such.

  All other folders are optional, and you can organize the contents of your `src/` folder any way you like. Other common folders in Astro projects include `src/layouts/`, `src/components`, `src/styles`, `src/scripts`.

### Repurpose config files

Gatsby has several top-level configuration files for configuration options, site and page metadata and generating page routes. You will not use any of these `gatsby-*.js` files in your Astro project, but there may be some content that you can reuse:

- `gatsby-config.js`: Move your `siteMetadata: {}` into `src/data/siteMetadata.js` (or `siteMetadata.json`) to import data about your site (title, description, social accounts etc.) into page layouts.

- `gatsby-browser.js`: Consider adding anything used here directly into your main layout's `<head>` tag.

- `gatsby-node.js`: You will not need to create your own nodes in Astro, but viewing the schema in this file may help you with defining types in your Astro project.

- `gatsby-ssr.js`: If you choose to use SSR in Astro, you will add and configure the adapter of your choice directly in `astro.config.mjs`.

### Convert JSX files to `.astro` files

> Here are some tips for converting a Gatsby `.js` component into a `.astro` component:

Reviewer 5: I think this section can be more clear in a recommendation on how to use React vs. Astro.

And it should also have a solution on how to handle images (see my comment above).

My take is:

- You can keep your JSX and just update imports and Gatsby specific components like `<Link>`. Only the index.astro needs to be an .astro file. (That is correct, right?)
  - Again, in this case: How to handle images?
- However, you may want to embrace astro a bit more. For example use .astro files for alle content that is static and JSX files only whenever content needs to be interactive for the client (islands). This will remove a lot of JSX boilderplate and give you full access to great astro features like glob (imports?).

Its important to understnad the barriers between React and Astro:
- You can import a react ocmponent in a .astro file.  (Link)
- You can even mix astro components and react components as long as this is in a .astro file (Link)
- However, you cannot import a .astro component in a .jsx file. Which means some helper components might need to be duplicates or build using react to make the compatible (see my comment in the other ticket…)

Reviewer 5: Update: I see in https://github.com/withastro/docs/pull/2211/files#diff-1c76fd47c1d1b25a4ed7614df83f293191bed75840838ebe5fd4ac61d157869cR262, that the part about pages above is wrong, so al pages need to become .astro files…

      ? <p>You are not authorized to see this page.</p>

      : <Header siteTitle={site.title} />
        <div class="banner">{message}</div>  
        <div style="margin: 0 auto; max-width: 960; padding: 1.25rem;">
          <main>
            <slot />
          </main>
        </div>
        <Footer siteTitle={site.title} />
    }

    <style>
      .banner { 
        margin: 0 auto;
        background-color: #f4f4f4; 
        padding: 1em 1.5em;
      }  
    </style>
    ```
  </Fragment>
</AstroJSXTabs>

### Migrating Layout Files

In Astro, your layout must include a full page shell (`<html>`, `<head>` and `<body>` tags) and a `<slot/>` instead of React's `{children}` prop. Your Gatsby `layout.js` and templates will not include these. 

You can use the following code to provide these extra elements around an existing Gatsby layout file, or write your own:

```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro"
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
    <title>Astro</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <slot />
  </body>
</html>
```

> You may also wish to reuse code from Gatsby's `src/components/seo.js` to include additional site metadata.

Reviewer 5: Another thing: In Gatsby one needs use the Header or Helmet to change classes and stiles on the html and body tag. In Astro one can just add them directly.

---
const { to } = Astro.props
---
<a href={to}><slot /></a>
```

### Gatsby Imports to Astro

If necessary, update any file imports to reference relative file paths exactly. This can be done using [import aliases](/en/guides/typescript/#import-aliases), or by writing out a relative path in full (e.g. `../../layouts/Layout.astro`). 

Note that `.astro` and several other file types must be imported with their full file extension.

### Gatsby Children Props to Astro

Convert any instances of `{children}` to an Astro `<slot />`. Astro does not need to receive `{children}` as a function prop and will automatically render child content in a `<slot />`. 

To access specific attributes passed to your component (e.g. `<Layout title="About Me"/>`), use `Astro.props`.

### Gatsby Styling to Astro

Convert any inline style objects (`style = {{fontWeight: "bold", }}`) to inline HTML style attributes (`style="font-weight:bold;"`). Or, use an Astro `<style>` tag for scoped CSS styles.

Global styling is achieved in Gatsby using CSS imports in `gatsby-browser.js`. In Astro, you will import `.css` files directly into a main layout component to achieve global styles.

> ### Gatsby Image Plugin to Astro

Reviewer 5: I think this needs to be expanded. It is one of the most convenient and important parts of Gatsby. 

See my comments in above/below and in the other issue.

But also, there should IMO be a list of gatsby image features and their corresponding Astro Image features. Like the lazy loading feature and resize options.

> Convert Gatsby's `<StaticImage />` and `<GatsbyImage />` components with [Astro's own image integration components](/en/guides/images/#astros-image-integration), or with a standard HTML `<img>` tag.

Reviewer 5: > …or with a standard HTML `<img>` tag.

This is not the same by a long shot. No resize, no different file types, …

Also, the HTML would change in those cases from a div to an img, so styles need to be updated in some cases.

> To continue using local images in Markdown using standard Markdown syntax (`![]()`), move your images into your `public/` folder. You may need to update the link to the relative URL.

Reviewer 5: This is not the same, is it? Gatsby would generate optimized images and give them a unique name on deploy to prevent stale caches. However, the public folder will do neither of those things.
